--=>TYPHOID

Typhoid is an infection caused by the bacteria Salmonella typhimurium. The bacterium lives in the intestines and bloodstream of humans and can spread between individuals by direct contact with the faeces of an infected person.

Signs and symptoms: 
Includes high fever, headache, abdominal pain, and either constipation or diarrhoea.

Causes

Typhoid fever spreads through contaminated food and water 
or through close contact with someone who’s infected.

Prevention

Typhoid fever can be a life-threatening bacterial infection that 
affects many organs throughout the body. Hence, timely checkup of typhoid is important.
 It can also be prevented by:

Washing hands with soap & water, before eating or preparing food & after using the toilet.
Avoid drinking untreated water
Avoid eating raw fruits & vegetables
Choose hot food



--=>DENGUE/MALARIA/CHIKUNGUNYA
Delhi turns into a breeding ground for mosquitoes after winters. 
The situation becomes worse if it receives rain. 
Hundreds of people get affected and hospitals become swarmed with chikungunya, 
dengue and malaria patients.

Signs and symptoms: Includes high fever, eye pain, rashes, body ache, 
shivering ( in malaria only) and low energy. 
If any of these symptoms are visible, a timely blood test for dengue,
 chikungunya, and malaria is recommended.

Causes

Dengue: It is transmitted to human bodies through the bite of female Aedes 
mosquitoes and from an infected human to another, in cases of blood transfusion. 
It has been seen that the dengue-causing mosquitoes mostly bites during the night.

Malaria: It is caused by the transmission of Plasmodium (parasitic protozoa) 
into the body’s system through a mosquito bite.
 Malaria test should be conducted to evade complications.

Chikungunya: It is also caused by the bite of the same female Aedes mosquitoes
 that causes dengue. In few people, body aches and weakness stays for many months. 
Since the symptoms are very similar, a separate test to confirm chikungunya is recommended.

Prevention

There are no medical ways or vaccines to prevent these diseases. 
But it is recommended to:

Wear clothes that cover you fully
Apply mosquito repellent creams
Avoid water stagnation in the surroundings, because they become excellent breeding 
grounds for mosquitoes
Make the living area and surroundings clean and hygienic
Change the water in room coolers at least once a week



BREATHING DISORDERS
Rising air pollution in the city is posing serious health hazards to all.

Shortness of breath can make it hard or uncomfortable for a person to take in the required oxygen the body needs. It is important to get it checked as shortness of breath can also be a sign of a serious disease.

Causes

There are many conditions that can make a person feel short of breath like asthma, emphysema, or pneumonia, heart disease, anxiety and panic attacks. Pollution and exposure to pollens during season change aggravates the situation further.

Prevention

There is no sure way to prevent breathing problems but the risk can be reduced by:

Washing hands frequently, especially when you have people around you with cold
Try keeping hands away from your nose, eyes, and mouth, as these are the places through which viruses are most likely to enter the body
Avoid smoking or use of any other form of tobacco products
Keeping the motor vehicle windows rolled up and the vents closed while driving
Exercise regularly
Avoid clean-up activities


DIGESTIVE DISORDERS
Any seasonal change triggers digestive and gut issues in most. Digestive disorders like food poisoning, gastroenteritis and irritable bowel movement impact life of many across all age groups.

Signs and symptoms: Includes abdominal bloating, heaviness in the stomach, belching, acidity, nausea, vomiting, dehydration

Causes

Sudden change in temperature weakens the immune system. During summers the viruses and bacteria grow more rapidly than in any other season. Hence, with the rising mercury, there is almost 45% increase in stomach infections and problems with the gut. This makes stomach test to rule out serious disorders imperative during summers.

Prevention

Being extra cautious during any seasonal change is the best way to prevent gut and digestion problems. Follow basic advice:

Eat home cooked food, and avoid outside food.
Wash hands regularly.
Avoid stale food, even if it is home cooked.
Drink ample water/ liquids to stay hydrated.

