disease you need to watch out for in this muddy, rainy season:


1. Dengue: The most common condition caused by tiger mosquito. 
Dengue symptoms are high fever, low platelet count, rashes, hypersensitivity amongst
other things. Using mosquito repellents and insect repellent plants like citronella is a
good idea to prevent this mosquito from entering your work station or home. 
Wearing clothes that cover your entire body will also be useful.



2. Chikungunya: Chikungunya is majorly caused by mosquitoes born in stagnated water found 
in air conditioners, coolers, plants, utensils, water pipes. 
This disease is transmitted through the bite of an aedes albopictus mosquito. 
This mosquito can bite you not only at night but also during the day. 
Joint pains and fever are two most common symptoms of chikungunya. 
Clearing out surfaces or containers with stagnant water and using insect 
repellent are the best way of prevention from chikungunya.

3. Malaria: Malaria is caused by female anopheles mosquito, 
which breed in waterlogged areas. It is because of this, 
that malaria is the most common ailment during monsoon. 
Fever, shivers, muscle pain and weakness are the most prominent symptoms of malaria. 
The best way to prevent malaria is to clean the water tank in your house frequently 
and to keep your surroundings clean.

4. Diarrhoea: This widespread bowel disease is caused due to the consumption of 
unhygienic foods and water. Diarrhoea is a highly preventable and treatable disease 
if one is careful. There are two kinds of diarrhoea, acute and chronic, 
both of which can be dealt with. Drinking boiled water and sticking home 
food is the best way to prevent this disease.

5. Typhoid: A water borne disease, typhoid is commonly caused due to poor sanitation. 
This means consumption of food and water cooked or kept in bad sanitation. 
S. Typhi bacteria is what causes typhoid. Fever, headache, weakness, pain and 
sore throat are some symptoms of typhoid. Keeping a hand sanitizer with you at all times, 
refraining from consuming street food and drinking healthy fluids will help you prevent 
from getting typhoid.

6. Viral fever: Viral fevers are a common symptom through the year, 
but are the most common during monsoons. Severe fever, cold and cough are 
some common symptoms. This may last from 3-7 days. However, it is always good 
to consult your doctor before diagnosing anything.

7. Cholera: Another monsoon disease that is caused due to the consumption 
of contaminated food and water. Poor hygiene and sanitation can cause many 
diseases and cholera is one of them. Diarrhoea accompanied by lose motions 
is the most common symptom of this monsoon disease. 

8. Leptospirosis: Also known as Weil’s syndrome, leptospirosis is caused by 
coming in contact with dirty water or muck. Inflammation, shivers, muscle pain, 
headache and fever are the common symptoms of this commonly spread monsoon disease. 
If you have any kind of cuts or bruises, it is better to cover them when stepping out 
to avoid getting this disease.

9. Stomach infections: Vomiting, diarrhoea and stomach pain are the most common 
stomach infections to get in this weather. This is popularly caused by consuming 
poorly handled food and liquid products. Gastroenteritis is another common stomach 
infection caused during this time. It is advised to have boiled water, have home 
cooked food and drinking enough healthy liquids.

10. Jaundice: Monsoon is the primary time of catching disease through consumption 
of contaminated water and food. Weakness, yellow urine, yellowing of eyes, vomiting 
and liver dysfunction are the symptoms of jaundice and should be looked out for immediately. 
As mentioned above, drinking boiled water, sticking to home cooked food and 
avoiding street food as much as you can is the best way to prevent this virus.
