Exercise #1: Push Ups
 
This is a great exercise for targeting the upper body, especially the chest and triceps.

Not everyone can support their full body weight at first, and that’s OK. This 
variation will help lighten your load so you can effectively develop your upper 
body strength.

Push ups 

Table Top version 

? Start on your hands and knees in table top position. With your arms straight, your 
  shoulders should be over your wrists and your hips should be over your knees.

? Bend your elbows and lower your upper body slowly to the ground. When your nose 
  reaches the floor, press up with your arms and return to the starting position.

? Repeat 10-15 times or as many as you can manage.

Push-Up on Knees 

? By putting some of your weight on your knees, you’ll be able to safely and 
  effectively perform this beginner-friendly modification.

? Begin on your hands and knees in a modified plank position. Your arms should 
  be straight, with your shoulders above your wrists.

? Rest your knees on the ground (preferably with a towel or mat beneath them), legs 
  together, with your feet suspended in the air. Slowly bend your elbows and lower 
  your chest to the floor, while maintaining a straight line from the crown of your 
  head to your knees. Next, press upwards, engaging your chest and core.

Repeat: 10-15 times or as many as you can manage.



Exercise #2: Squat
 
Squats are a full-body fitness staple that work the hips, glutes, quads, and 
hamstrings, and even sneakily strengthens the core. Squats may help improve balance 
and coordination, as well as bone density.

Stand with feet a little wider than shoulder-width apart, hips stacked over 
knees and knees over ankles.

squat

? Roll the shoulders back and down away from the ears. Note: Allowing the 
  back to round (like a turtle’s shell) will cause unnecessary stress on the lower 
  back. It’s important to maintain a neutral spine throughout the movement.

? From here bend at the knees and begin lowering yourself down unlocking the hips, 
  slightly bringing them back. Keep sending hips backward as the knees begin to bend.

? While the butt starts to stick out, make sure the chest and shoulders stay upright, 
  and the back stays straight. Keep the head facing forward with eyes straight ahead 
  for a neutral spine.

? Engage core and, with bodyweight in the heels, explode back up to standing, 
  driving through heels.

Repeat: 10-15 times or as many as you can manage.



Exercise #3: Static Lunges
 

Static lunges are great for working all the major muscles of the hips, glutes and thighs!
Sometimes balancing can be an issue here but if you do struggle you can try this 
move while holding onto a chair or wall.

alternating lunges abby pell

? Stand with right foot forward, left foot back about 3 feet apart.

? Bend the knees to lower the body towards the floor. Keep the front knee behind 
  the toes and be sure to lower straight down rather than forward.

? Keep the torso straight and abs in as you push through the front heel and back 
  to starting position.

Repeat: 10-15 times or as many as you can manage.

Exercise #4: Tricep Dips
 
This exercise targets the back of your arms (bingo wings). In order to complete 
this exercise you will require an elevated, sturdy and flat surface i.e. bench, 
chair or step.

tricep dips

? Start with your back towards the bench, arms straight at your side, lower 
  yourself down enough to place your hands behind your body about shoulder width 
  apart, hold onto the bench with your knuckles facing forward.

? Move your feet so that your legs are at a 90 degree angle in front of you.

? From the position bend at the elbow and lower yourself down until your arms 
  are at a 90 degree angle. Once here push yourself back up to the starting position.

Repeat: 10-15 times or as many as you can manage.



Exercise #5: Plank
 
Planking is a simple but effective bodyweight exercise. Holding the body develops 
strength primarily in the core—the muscles that connect the upper and lower body—as well
as the shoulders, arms, and glutes.

plank

? Place the forearms on the ground with the elbows aligned below the shoulders, and 
  arms parallel to the body at about shoulder-width distance.

? Ground the toes into the floor and squeeze the glutes to stabilize the body. Your 
  legs should be working in the move too; careful not to lock or hyperextend your knees.

? Neutralize the neck and spine by looking at a spot on the floor about a foot 
  beyond the hands. Your head should be in line with your back.

Hold the position for 20 seconds. As you get more comfortable with the move, 
hold your plank for as long as possible without compromising form or breath.

