What now? How do you start and what do you need to know before you jump in?

*Do some research upfront - Not all training is smart training and there's a lot of 
  bad information out there. Make sure that you are choosing reliable resources for 
  your information and make sure you pick an approach that trains the body comprehensively, 
  in a way that is balanced, and focused on good health.

*Pace yourself, and start slowly if you need to - The most common mistake I see 
 beginners make is being way too aggressive in their training, way too soon. Take time 
 to build a strong base for yourself; if you go 110% right out of the gate, you're likely 
 to end up hurting yourself or burning yourself out on a commitment that needs to be 
 lifelong. Getting fit takes time and hard work - try to become comfortable with that 
 concept; tell yourself that you're in this for the long haul and so there is no 
 reason to rush along your training in a way that puts your health or new good 
 habits at risk.

*Make it work for you - Similar to the point above, you have to realize that this is 
 YOUR journey. It doesn't matter how fit someone else is, or where you think you should 
 be, you have to be willing to start where your body needs you to start, and make 
 modifications as you need to so that nothing ends up being a roadblock to progress. 
 Come across an exercise interval that's too hard? Jog in place until it's over. Really 
 struggling and need a break even though the interval is not over? Take a couple seconds 
 to rest & recoup before you push yourself again. Don't be afraid to work hard, but also 
 know that's it's your responsibility  to make it work for you.

*Commit - There will be good days and bad, setbacks and successes, but you have to commit 
 to showing up and working hard. You won't always feel like it, and it's okay to miss 
 workouts occasionally, but for the most part, you want to focus on building & sticking 
 to the habit.

*Keep self talk positive - There's no reason to talk down about yourself, no matter 
 how unfit you might be. There is no shame in any starting place. In short; don't say 
 anything to yourself that you wouldn't say to your best friend. 

*Keep goals positive & action focused - Instead of "I will lose 10 lbs", say "I will 
 workout for 30 minutes 4 times a week". Instead of "I will tone my flabby arms" say 
 "I will gain strength and be able to lift things that I couldn't before". Try to focus 
 less on end result, and more on the actions that you are responsible for (that will 
 likely ultimately lead you to your goal more effectively, anyways).

*Don't be afraid to push yourself, but listen to your body - Sweating, feeling out of 
 breath, burning muscles - all of these things can be part of a great workout. It's 
 important to learn to get comfortable with being uncomfortable, but there are also 
 some things that you shouldn't just push through (real pain, chest pain inability to 
 catch breath, etc). Stay tuned in during your workouts to walk the line between 
 challenging yourself, and respecting the messages that your body is sending you. 


*Don't make yourself hate exercise - There are so many different types of training 
 and so many variables that one can adjust to their liking; find something that you 
 enjoy, that makes you feel good. You don't have to spend hours in the gym, you don't 
 even need a gym membership! You don't need fancy equipment or supplements, you just need 
 smart workouts, good nutrition, and motivation. 

*Keep an eye on nutrition - Nutrition is just as important as exercise, and the 
 two really benefit one another. Focus on eating a diet that is as fresh and nutrient 
 dense as possible, avoiding fad diets and processed food as much as possible. 

****Know that any effort put towards your health is always worth it!****